— — PAGE 1 — —
Adaptive Design for
Phase II/III Platform Trial of
Lassa Fever Therapeutics

Josephine Bourner, Michel Vaillant, Alex Paddy Abdel Salam, Marie Jaspard, Camille Fritzell,

Shevin T. Jacob, Tom E. Fletcher, Michael Ramharter, Nnennaya Ajayi, Sylvanus Okogbenin,

Cyril Erameh, Donald Grant, Robert Samuels, Oladele Oluwafemi Ayodeji, Armand Sprecher,
Bronner P. Gongalves, Tansy Edwards, Piero Olliaro; and the WALC Work Package 2 Working Group

The current recommendation for treating Lassa fever with
ribavirin is supported only by weak evidence. Given the
persistent effects in areas with endemic transmission and
epidemic potential, there is an urgent need to reassess
ribavirin and investigate other potential therapeutic can-
didates; however, a robust clinical trial method adapted to
Lassa fever epidemiology has not yet been established.
We propose an adaptive phase II/III multicenter random-
ized controlled platform trial that uses a superiority frame-
work with an equal allocation ratio and accounts for chal-
lenges selecting the primary end point and estimating the
target sample size by using an interim analysis.

L= fever is a viral hemorrhagic fever endemic to
parts of West Africa. Each year, high numbers of
Lassa fever cases are reported in Nigeria; in 2023, a
total of 1,067 confirmed cases were reported and re-
sulted in 189 deaths; the case-fatality ratio (CFR) was
18% (1). Annual case numbers are also high in Sierra
Leone (2) and Liberia (3); sporadic cases are reported
in Guinea (4), Togo (5), and Benin (6). Modeling, how-
ever, suggests that Lassa virus endemicity stretches
much further afield, into countries that have, to date,
not reported cases of Lassa fever (7).

Illness onset is typically characterized by a series
of nonspecific signs/symptoms (e.g., fever, headache,
vomiting, and abdominal pain) (8). Although Lassa
is categorized as a hemorrhagic illness, bleeding is

reported for only ~20% of cases (8). Other severe com-
plications of Lassa fever include acute kidney injury,
encephalopathy, and respiratory distress, although
their reporting and detection among Lassa fever pa-
tients is inconsistent and highly variable (9,10). The
reported CFR among patients with Lassa fever also
varies, reported as 12% by a recent large prospective
observational study in Nigeria% (10) but up to 60%
for other outbreaks in Nigeria and Sierra Leone (2,11).

Therapeutic options available to treat Lassa fe-
ver are limited. Ribavirin, although not licensed
for Lassa fever treatment, is commonly featured in
clinical management guidelines in combination with
supportive care. Currently, 2 active ribavirin treat-
ment regimens are being used for adults (Table 1),
and modifications are available for pregnant women
and children (12), although none have undergone
head-to-head evaluation in comparative trials. Use
of ribavirin for Lassa fever treatment is based largely
on the results of a single clinical trial in Sierra Le-
one, conducted by McCormick et al. and published
in 1986 (13). However, serious limitations with the
conduct, methods, and analysis of trial data have
cast doubt on its effectiveness and raised concerns
about the safety of ribavirin therapy for Lassa fever
(14). Although other observational studies reporting
the outcomes of patients receiving ribavirin therapy

Author affiliations: University of Oxford, Oxford, UK (J. Bourner,
A.P.A. Salam, B.P. Gongalves, P. Olliaro); Luxembourg Institute
of Health, Strassen, Luxembourg (M. Vaillant); Sorbonne
Université, Paris, France (M. Jaspard); St Antoine Hospital, Paris
(M. Jaspard); The Alliance for International Medical Action, Dakar,
Senegal (M. Jaspard); Inserm, Bordeaux, France (C. Fritzell);
Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine, Liverpool, UK, S.T. Jacob,
T.E. Fletcher); University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany (M. Ramharter); German Center for

Infection Research, Riems, Germany (M. Ramharter); Alex
Ekwueme Federal University Teaching Hospital, Abakaliki,

Nigeria (N. Ajayi); Irrua Specialist Teaching Hospital, Irrua, Nigeria
(S. Okogbenin, C. Erameh); Kenema General Hospital, Kenema,
Sierra Leone (D. Grant, R. Samuels); Federal Medical Centre,
Owo, Nigeria (0.0. Ayodeji); Médecins sans Frontiéres, Brussels,
Belgium (A. Sprecher); London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, London, UK (T. Edwards)

DOI: https://doi.org/10.3201/eid3102.240251

Emerging Infectious Diseases * www.cdc.gov/eid * Vol. 31, No. 2, February 2025 eg
— — PAGE 2 — —
ONLINE REPORT

have been published (9,15,16), limited inference can
be made about the generalizability of their results
because of potential biases in the retrospective, non-
comparative designs.

Thus, the need to reevaluate ribavirin and explore
other potential therapeutic options is urgent. Howev-
er, clinical research for emerging infectious diseases,
such as Lassa fever, is challenging, both methodologi-
cally and operationally.

Although Lassa fever is endemic to several West
Africa countries, each year patients are hospitalized
over a large geographic area (17) for which recruit-
ment into a clinical trial would be limited by logistical
factors such as access, funding, and human resources.
The wide geographic distribution of patients creates
further challenges because introduction of heteroge-
neity may result from variations in Lassa virus strain,
illness and death rates, ribavirin availability and use,
and supportive care capabilities, which vary across
sites and countries.

The limited number of large-scale prospective
clinical research studies also makes it difficult to iden-
tify a clinically meaningful and measurable primary
end point, which is required to generate a sample
size that can be feasibly achieved through the avail-
able pool of patients and trial sites. Specifically, using
death as a primary end point may, in fact, not be vi-
able for Lassa fever treatment trials because the sam-
ple size would potentially require recruiting several
thousand patients to detect a significant treatment
effect (18). Identifying an alternative end point that
is clinically relevant, however, is complicated by the
limited heterogeneous data that have been published
to date (8).

All those issues make it critical that future clinical
trials involving Lassa fever use a standardized meth-
od. Furthermore, to accommodate potentially large
requisite sample sizes and avoid resource waste and
effort duplication, future clinical trials will need to be
collaborative: multisite and potentially multicoun-
try. Therefore, a broad range of stakeholders need
to agree with regard to key aspects of trial design.
Without a co-developed approach, future clinical tri-
als evaluating Lassa fever therapeutics are at risk for

being fragmented, underpowered, biased, and diffi-
cult to interpret among the countries and sites where
they are conducted.

In 2021, the West Africa Lassa Fever Consor-
tium (WALC) was established to move forward
therapeutic advances for Lassa fever, from clinical
development through availability of and access to
effective treatments. The consortium joined >100
stakeholders from public health, academic research,
industry, and drug regulation, among other areas,
to generate a clinical development plan, including a
target product profile for Lassa fever therapeutics,
research capacity development plan, clinical trial
proposal, and value proposition (19). We describe
the clinical trial proposal developed by WALC, for
which the prepositioned protocol has been pub-
lished separately (20) and the key design consider-
ations were taken into account to ensure that future
trials can generate reliable and clinically meaning-
ful results.

Methods

A consultation group was established to develop a
prepositioned protocol for an adaptive phase II/TIII
randomized controlled platform trial to evaluate mul-
tiple Lassa fever therapeutics. The consultation group
consisted of 56 stakeholders representing clinicians
and clinical researchers with experience and expertise
in the treatment of Lassa fever, drug developers, eth-
ics committees, nongovernment organizations, public
health agencies, regulatory bodies, social scientists,
and statisticians (Table 2). Most stakeholders rep-
resented organizations based in West Africa (57%);
the rest represented pan-African organizations (4%),
international organizations (4%), and organizations
based outside Africa in Europe and the United States
(36%) (Table 2).

The protocol was developed through group dis-
cussion. Remote meetings were scheduled on aver-
age every 2 weeks, and 1 face-to-face meeting was
held in Abidjan, Cote d’Ivoire, in February 2022 to
generate consensus on key design issues. Discussion
information came from data available from Lassa
fever treatment centers, clinician representatives

Table 1. Ribavirin regimens for treating adult patients with Lassa fever (12)

Regimen, period, days Dose Frequency/duration

McCormick
1 (loading dose) 33 mg/kg (maximum 2.64 g) Immediately
1-4 16 mg/kg (maximum 1.28 g) Every 6h
5-10 8 mg/kg (maximum 0.64 g) Every 8h

Irrua
Day 1 (loading dose) 100 mg/ kg (maximum 7g) Divided in 2 doses: 2/3 immediately; 1/3 8 h later
2-7 25 mg/kg Once a day
8-10 12.5 mg/kg Once a day

e10 Emerging Infectious Diseases * www.cdc.gov/eid « Vol. 31, No. 2, February 2025
— — PAGE 3 — —
Adaptive Trial of Lassa Fever Therapeutics

Table 2. West Africa Lassa fever Consortium stakeholder roles and regions in which their organizations were based

No. (%) persons

Stakeholder role Total West Africa Pan-Africa Outside Africa* International
Clinical researcherst 15 1(7) 0 14 (93) 0
Cliniciant 7 7 (100) 0 0 0
Drug developer 3 0 0 3 (100) 0
Ethics committee 2 2 (100) 0 0 0
Nongovernment organization 9 8 (89) 0 0 1 (11)
Public health agency 11 9 (82) 1 (9) 0 1 (9)
Regulatory body 1 0 1 (100) 0 0
Social scientists 5 5 (100) 0 0 0
Statisticians 3 0 0 3 (100) 0
Total 56 32 (57) 2 (4) 20 (36) 2 (4)

*Organizations based in Europe and the United States.

tPrimary function at their organization was research, but many also held clinical roles.
Primary function at their organization was patient management, but all conducted research.

involved in WALC, and published research data. To
supplement the available data, 2 additional research
studies were conducted: a systematic review of sup-
portive care guidelines used to provide information
for the supportive care requirements described in
the protocol (Appendix 1, https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/
EID/article/31/2/24-0251-App1.pdf) and a survey
of clinicians who work in Lassa fever treatment cen-
ters to provide information across sites about the
variation in Lassa fever treatment practices and the
acceptability of placebo-controlled trials (Appen-
dix 2, https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/EID/article/31/2/
24-0251-App2.pdf).

Results

Among the challenges of designing clinical trials for
Lassa fever is the lack of robust clinical data available
to use for end point selection and sample size esti-
mation. Furthermore, diverse clinically meaningful
outcomes arising in the potential patient pool, com-
bined with sporadic overall case numbers (8) and lim-
ited available therapeutic options, make enrolling a

If interim analysis
results in in sample size

Amend
sample size

va]
£ 2
Ww
oD =
a ©
~ Cc
a oO
ra
E els
— / &
i 2£
< £
lu

Amend primary

Enrollment of end point

300 patients

If interim analysis results
in no reduction in sample size

Emerging Infectious Diseases * www.cdc.

sufficient number of patients within a reasonable
timeframe difficult.

As a result of those issues, a portfolio approach
to the design of a phase II/TII trial, which enabled
the combined evaluation of multiple drug candi-
dates based on their own individual characteristics
and requirements through a single platform to op-
timize research efforts, was selected by using a su-
periority framework with an equal allocation ratio.
To account for uncertainties around the frequencies
of the outcomes included in a composite end point,
the sample size would initially be calculated for a
single end point of death, with a planned interim
analysis for sample size reestimation to evaluate
or confirm the feasibility of achieving sufficient
numbers of patients by using data underpinning
the composite end point (Figure). Although the
sample size needed to assess a primary end point
of death may be large, initiation of the trial would
require its acceptance by the research team should
the reestimated sample size not decrease after the
interim analysis.

Figure. Proposed design

of adaptive phase II/III
randomized controlled platform
trial to evaluate multiple Lassa
fever therapeutics.

Continue
enrollment and
add new arms

gov/eid « Vol. 31, No. 2, February 2025 e11
— — PAGE 4 — —
ONLINE REPORT

Our trial design is intended to use the limited
number of Lassa fever cases efficiently by enabling
data collection for evaluation of multiple therapeu-
tic options to begin in parallel with data collection
to validate the end point selection. The trial initially
recruits nonpregnant adults and has the potential to
expand to pregnant women and children after the
safety and efficacy of investigational medicinal prod-
ucts have been established.

Eligibility Criteria

Eligibility criteria consensus was achieved (Table 3).
Two proposals for the enrollment of patients based on
diagnostic criteria were considered. The first proposal
considered enrollment based on clinical suspicion of
Lassa fever, pending reverse transcription PCR (RT-
PCR) confirmation. In that scenario, all patients with
suspected Lassa fever would be eligible for inclusion,
and treatment and would be initiated at the point of
enrollment. If the RT-PCR returned a positive result,
the patient would continue to receive treatment and
remain in the study, but if the RT-PCR returned a
negative result, the patient would be withdrawn from
treatment and the study. The second proposal consid-
ered enrolling patients only after receipt of a positive
RT-PCR test result. To minimize risk that persons
with suspected cases might be unnecessarily exposed
to experimental therapies, the working group ullti-
mately decided, after consultation with drug regula-
tors and clinicians at Lassa fever treatment centers,
that patients should be enrolled in trials only after
receipt of a positive RT-PCR result confirming Lassa
fever diagnosis.

Primary End Point

On the basis of results of a previous exercise, which
revealed that evaluating all-cause deaths as a primary
end point for Lassa fever would require unfeasible
sample sizes (18) and a review of data presented in
published scientific literature (9,10), the working
group selected “unfavorable outcome” as the prima-
ry end point (Table 4). The composite primary end
point offered a potential solution to the sample size

challenges posed by a single primary outcome mea-
sure of all-cause deaths or any other single outcome
because the available data revealed no other clini-
cally meaningful outcome that was more frequent
than deaths. Basing sample size calculations on the
combined event rate of several clinically meaningful
outcomes would theoretically decrease the number of
patients needed to be enrolled to detect a statistically
significant result.

The composite outcome assesses the new onset of
an event any time after initiation of treatment, which
patients can meet only 1 time. Any events meeting the
criteria (Table 4) that are present at the point of enroll-
ment (and before initiation of treatment) would not be
included in the final analysis. If a patient is enrolled
with one of the events and another subsequently de-
velops after initiation of treatment, only the second
event would be included in the final analysis. De-
tection of both separate events after the initiation of
treatment is equivalent to a single outcome.

Sample Size and Interim Analysis
A critical problem with the composite end point is
the absence of published data for the frequency of
the component outcomes to use to calculate the target
sample size. Specifically, published data are lacking
on patients who experience 2 consecutive recordings
of mean arterial pressure <65 mm Hg or 2 consecutive
recordings of the ratio of arterial oxygen partial pres-
sure to fractional inspired oxygen (SpO,/FiO,) >315.

Because of those uncertainties, the sample size
calculation will initially conservatively assume that
the frequency of composite end point is the same as
the all-cause deaths end point. Sample size calcula-
tion will therefore be based on a mortality rate of
15% in the control arm ((10,23)), effect size of 33%
relative risk reduction (a 10% absolute risk reduction
for clinical importance), 90% power, and 10% loss to
follow-up, generating a target sample size of 1,010 in
each arm, which for a 2-arm trial may take >6 years
to achieve.

After enrolling 300 patients, an independent Data
Safety and Monitoring Board (DSMB) will conduct

Table 3. Criteria for the inclusion or exclusion in future clinical trials for Lassa fever

Criteria

Inclusion criteria: all patients must meet criteria to be included in the trial

Reverse transcription PCR confirmation of Lassa fever

Adult participants (persons who had attained the age of majority according to national regulations in their country of enrollment)

Exclusion criteria: patients who meet any of the criteria will be excluded from the trial

Patients receiving end-of-life care for another illness
Involvement in another clinical trial

Unwilling to provide informed consent

History of allergic reaction or other contraindication to trial drugs

Received drug therapy for Lassa fever (excluding supportive care) before inclusion

e12

Emerging Infectious Diseases * www.cdc.gov/eid « Vol. 31, No. 2, February 2025
— — PAGE 5 — —
Adaptive Trial of Lassa Fever Therapeutics

Table 4. Composite primary end point for adaptive phase II/III randomized controlled platform trial to evaluate multiple Lassa fever

therapeutics

Assessment
Parameter (any of the following) Measurement definition time point*
Death 1) Yes, 2) No Days 1-28
New onset of acute kidney injury KDIGO 3 (https://kdigo.org) Day 1: hospital
New onset of acute respiratory failure Arterial oxygen partial pressure/fractional inspired oxygen <315 (27) discharge

based on 2 consecutive measurements taken >4 h apart
meeting the above criteria

New onset of shock

Mean arterial pressure <65 mm Hg (22) based on 2 consecutive

measurements taken >4 h apart meeting the above criteria

*Events will be evaluated on day 1 after treatment initiation.

an interim analysis evaluating the overall event rate
(blind to treatment allocation) to assess the feasibility
of achieving a sample size informed by data relating to
the outcomes included in the composite end point. The
analysis will describe the risk for new onset of the com-
ponent outcomes of the composite end point at the point
of randomization, including their variation by site. That
information will be used to reestimate the target sample
size, taking into account the precision of the prevalence
estimates by using a method selected by the DSMB (24).
To account for variation in outcomes between health
centers, subsequent randomization will be stratified by
site. The composite end point will be deemed feasible if
the reestimated sample size substantially lowers the tar-
get sample size and is attainable within a shorter time.
For example, scenarios for projected recruitment times
under a new target sample size could be presented to
the DSMB along with revised expectations for timing of
delivery of further results and treatments for patients.
In that instance, the sample size will be adjusted via an
amendment, and the trial will continue with the com-
posite end point (Table 4).

If the frequency of the events in the composite
end point is not considerably higher than the fre-
quency of deaths in the study population, the trial
team will consider the feasibility of continuing the
study with either a single end point of death or the
composite end point. For example, there is no clear
indication that a composite end point will reduce the
sample size such that clinically relevant results will
be available sooner. To ensure trial integrity (25), de-
tails about the sample size reestimation and decision
process will not be shared with investigators to avoid
indirect inferences on the interim data.

Control Arm

We surveyed clinicians at treatment centers in West
Africa about the acceptability of enrolling Lassa fever
patients in placebo-controlled trials (Appendix 2). In
total, 17 clinicians from 6 health facilities that receive
Lassa fever patients in Nigeria, Sierra Leone, and Li-
beria responded. A total of 59% of respondents stated
that they would not enroll their patients in that type of

Emerging Infectious Diseases * www.cdc.gov/eid * Vol. 31, No. 2, February 2025

trial, 6% stated that they were not sure, and 12% stated
that they would enroll only patients with mild cases.
Separate discussions with representatives of
ethics committees and regulators within the consor-
tium revealed similar concerns about randomizing
patients to receive supportive care alone. Therefore,
ribavirin would need to be used as the control arm
treatment. However, there are 2 regimens currently
in use for adult patients, for which there is no strong
clinical or pharmacokinetic evidence base (26,27)
and that were reported to be in equal use across the
treatment centers involved in the survey (Appendix
2). Thus, neither which ribavirin regimen should be
used in a control arm nor which regimen would be ac-
ceptable to most clinicians involved in a trial is clear.
Several options were considered, but resolving the
issue in a clinical trial comparing different ribavirin
regimens also presents challenges, particularly if ran-
domizing patients to supportive care alone would not
be acceptable. In that scenario, establishing the effect
of ribavirin on Lassa fever patient outcomes would
still be challenging, to the extent that even if 1 regi-
men demonstrates greater efficacy than another, dif-
ferentiating between whether that regimen performs
better than no active treatment or simply does not
harm patients would be difficult. Subsequently inter-
preting the results of future trials comparing different
therapeutic options to the better-performing ribavirin
regimen would also be at risk of generating inconclu-
sive results. We present several design options that
could be considered (Appendix 3, https://wwwnc.
cdce.gov/EID/article/31/2/24-0251-App3.pdf).

Supportive Care

The systematic review of supportive care guidelines
(Appendix 1) returned limited consistent recommen-
dations for the management of acute kidney injury,
acute respiratory distress syndrome, and shock; no
guidelines met the eligibility criteria describing sup-
portive care for encephalopathy. The working group
was, therefore, unable to make an evidence-based
recommendation for what should comprise support-
ive care within the trial.

e13
— — PAGE 6 — —
ONLINE REPORT

Moreover, because of variation between support-
ive care practices and the availability of resources be-
tween treatment centers, the trial had to be designed
in such a way that heterogeneity in patient outcomes
influenced by supportive care practices would not af-
fect evaluation of the treatment effect. Accordingly,
the protocol defines only minimum requirements for
patient monitoring that can be feasibly implemented
across all sites and that will detect the composite pri-
mary outcome parameters by using a standardized
definition. Ultimately, decisions about supportive
care provided in the trial will be made according to
local practices at each site.

Discussion

We describe an adaptive phase II/II randomized
controlled platform trial for evaluating multiple
therapeutics for Lassa fever that accounts for uncer-
tainties that underlie critical assumptions of the trial
design. The aim of WALC was to design a trial that ef-
ficiently generates reliable and clinically meaningful
results. Forty years have passed since the last treat-
ment trial was conducted, and concerns are growing
about the safety of using ribavirin to treat Lassa fever;
therefore, there is little time to wait for further obser-
vational studies to resolve uncertainties around the
frequency of patient outcomes.

The portfolio approach enables concurrent evalu-
ation of multiple therapeutic options and permits ef-
ficient and flexible assessment in that it prevents the
need for multiple trials to generate evidence across
multiple different comparisons, enables data to be
collected consistently and in a comparable man-
ner, avoids focus and investment being dedicated to
one lead product without overlooking the rest of the
pipeline, and reduces time to reach a clinical decision
through the existence of an established research in-
frastructure. Conducting an interim analysis by using
data from the first 300 patients randomized to treat-
ment would strengthen the assumptions made in the
trial’s primary end point and sample size calculation.
In other words, the trial would collect the clinical data
needed to accurately reestimate its target sample size
for use of the composite end point without having to
wait for the results of a separate observational study.
The interim analysis arising from that process would
then either confirm the viability of using the compos-
ite end point over deaths or reject that approach.

Although using the composite end point confers
many benefits for the trial design, it is not without
its challenges. In particular, working group members
were mindful about selecting a composite outcome
measure that is both clinically meaningful and reliably

e14

measured. The clinical meaningfulness of a single re-
cording of mean arterial pressure of <65 mm Hg that
resolves either spontaneously or with minimal fluid
therapy is unclear, particularly when no association
between hypotension and death has been reported in
large observational cohorts (10,23). Similarly, the clin-
ical relevance of a single SpO,/ FiO, recording of $315
is also unclear because oxygen saturation naturally
fluctuates. For that reason, to meet the definitions, the
evaluation of SpO,/ FiO, for acute respiratory failure
and mean arterial pressure for shock requires 2 con-
secutive measurements, taken at least 4 hours apart,
that meet the threshold criteria (Table 4).

Encephalopathy was widely considered to be
clinically meaningful. Its correlation with death for
patients with Lassa fever has been previously dem-
onstrated (9), but identifying a suitable reliable mea-
surement instrument was challenging, and diagnostic
practices across sites varied widely.

Another challenge of the composite end point is
ensuring that patients are correctly classified as be-
ing event-free at baseline. A patient with a SpO2/
FiO, of 320 at admission in whom SpO,/FiO, <315
subsequently develops soon after enrollment would
be classified as having an unfavorable outcome, but
the difference between those 2 values may just be the
result of natural fluctuations in vital signs or progres-
sion of a pathophysiologic pathway that was already
well under way before initiation of an effective antivi-
ral therapy. That issue should, however, be resolved
by randomization.

Last, another challenge is determining the appro-
priate action that should be taken in the event that the
interim analysis shows no reduction in sample size
when the sample size calculation is based on more
robust data on the composite end point. In that sce-
nario, based on predefined parameters established
before the start of the trial, the DSMB would need
to decide which end point would generate the most
clinically meaningful data for evaluation of the thera-
peutics included in the trial.

There are undoubtedly other aspects that we
have not covered in this article but that can be ad-
dressed when setting up a trial. For instance, the trial
could, as a secondary objective, gather information on
other potential outcomes, such as post-acute-phase
sequelae through long-term follow-up or outcomes
measures on which there was insufficient agreement
or evidence (e.g., encephalopathy [(28)] and hemato-
logic alterations [(29)]). Collectively, those data will
help improve the currently limited body of knowl-
edge about clinical manifestations and potential out-
come measures of Lassa fever.

Emerging Infectious Diseases * www.cdc.gov/eid « Vol. 31, No. 2, February 2025
— — PAGE 7 — —
With this trial proposal, developed in collabora-
tion with a broad range of stakeholders in the Lassa
fever research landscape, WALC aims to catalyze
research progress for a disease that has for decades
remained dormant. The published protocol is freely
available and can be adapted by any research team
with funding to initiate a trial (20).

Acknowledgments

We thank all members and contributors to the WALC
Work Package 2 working group who attended meetings
and provided valuable input throughout the project:
Manfred Accrombessi, Rhanda Adechina, Nnennaya
Ajayi, Adejoke Akano, Sean Amberg, Oluwafemi Ayodeji,
Oumou Younoussa Bah-Sow, Josephine Bourner,
Amadou Cissé, Eric Diendere, Moussa Douno, Alexandre
Duvignaud, Tansy Edwards, Abiodun Egwuenu,

Cyril Erameh, William Fischer, Tom Fletcher, Pierre
Formenty, Camille Fritzell, Julius Gilayeneh, Bronner
Gongalves, Donald Grant, Stephan Giinther, Mory Chérif
Haidara, Geza Harczi, Alison Heald, Peter Horby,

Philip Horgan, Lena Hiibl, Shevin Jacob, Marie Jaspard,
Denis Malvy, Olayinka Ogunleye, Sylvanus Okogbenin,
Adebola Olayinka, Piero Olliaro, Kevin Okwaraeke,
Michael Ramharter, Alex Salam, Robert Samuels, John
Schieffelin, Béatrice Serra, Issiaka Sombie, Armand
Sprecher, Michel Vaillant, David Wohl, and Beno

Nyam Yakubu.

We also thank staff at Irrua Specialist Teaching Hospital,
Federal Medical Centre Owo, Alex Ekwueme Federal
University Teaching Hospital Abakaliki, Jos University
Teaching Hospital, Kenema Government Hospital, and
Phebe Hospital for participating in online surveys and
providing helpful insights about the treatment of Lassa
fever in West Africa. We thank representatives of the
European Medicines Agency, World Health Organization,
and the African Vaccines Regulatory Forum for their
feedback on the trial designs developed as part of this
project. Those achievements could not have been possible
without contributions of WALC members and the broader
stakeholder community that has been involved through
independently funded original research, systematic
reviews, and participation in consultations and meetings
over the course of several months.

The work undertaken within the scope of the WALC was
supported by Wellcome.

About the Author

Ms. Bourner is a senior clinical trials manager and final
year DPhil student in the Pandemic Sciences Institute at
the University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Adaptive Trial of Lassa Fever Therapeutics

References

1.

2.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

Nigeria Centre for Disease Control. Lassa fever situation
report. Epi Week. 2023;52:2023.

Shaffer JG, Schieffelin JS, Grant DS, Goba A, Momoh M,
Kanneh L, et al.; Viral Hemorrhagic Fever Consortium.

Data set on Lassa fever in post-conflict Sierra Leone. Data
Brief. 2019;23:103673.

Jetoh RW, Malik S, Shobayo B, Taweh F, Yeabah TO,

George J, et al. Epidemiological characteristics of Lassa fever
cases in Liberia: a retrospective analysis of surveillance data,
2019-2020. Int J Infect Dis. 2022;122:767-74.

Magassouba N, Koivogui E, Conde S, Kone M, Koropogui M,
Soropogui B, et al. A sporadic and lethal Lassa fever case in
Forest Guinea, 2019. Viruses. 2020;12:1062.

Patassi AA, Landoh DE, Mebiny-Essoh Tchalla A,

Halatoko WA, Assane H, Saka B, et al. Emergence of Lassa
fever disease in northern Togo: report of two cases in Oti
District in 2016. Case Rep Infect Dis. 2017;2017:8242313.
Yadouleton A, Picard C, Rieger T, Loko F, Cadar D,
Kouthon EC, et al. Lassa fever in Benin: description of

the 2014 and 2016 epidemics and genetic characterization

of a new Lassa virus. Emerg Microbes Infect. 2020;
9:1761-70.

Mylne AQ, Pigott DM, Longbottom J, Shearer F, Duda KA,
Messina JP, et al. Mapping the zoonotic niche of Lassa fever
in Africa. Trans R Soc Trop Med Hyg. 2015;109:483-92.
Merson L, Bourner J, Jalloh S, Erber A, Salam AP, Flahault A,
et al. Clinical characterization of Lassa fever: a systematic
review of clinical reports and research to inform clinical trial
design. PLoS Neg] Trop Dis. 2021;15:e0009788.

Okokhere P, Colubri A, Azubike C, Iruolagbe C, Osazuwa O,
Tabrizi S, et al. Clinical and laboratory predictors of Lassa
fever outcome in a dedicated treatment facility in Nigeria: a
retrospective, observational cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis.
2018;18:684-95.

Duvignaud A, Jaspard M, Etafo IC, Gabillard D, Serra B,
Abejegah CG, et al; LASCOPE study group. Lassa fever
outcomes and prognostic factors in Nigeria (LASCOPE): a
prospective cohort study. Lancet Glob Health. 2021;9:e469-78.
Buba MI, Dalhat MM, Nguku PM, Waziri N, Mohammad JO,
Bomoi IM, et al. Mortality among confirmed Lassa fever
cases during the 2015-2016 outbreak in Nigeria. Am J Public
Health. 2018;108:262-4.

Nigeria Centre for Disease Control. National Guideline for
Lassa Fever Case Management. 2018 [cited 2024 Feb 20].
https://ncdc.gov.ng/ncdce.gov.ng/themes/common/docs/
protocols/92_1547068532.pdf

McCormick JB, King IJ, Webb PA, Scribner CL, Craven RB,
Johnson KM, et al. Lassa fever. Effective therapy with
ribavirin. N Engl J Med. 1986;314:20-6.

Eberhardt KA, Mischlinger J, Jordan S, Groger M, Giinther S,
Ramharter M. Ribavirin for the treatment of Lassa fever: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Infect Dis.
2019;87:15-20.

Ajayi NA, Nwigwe CG, Azuogu BN, Onyire BN,

Nwonwu EU, Ogbonnaya LU, et al. Containing a Lassa
fever epidemic in a resource-limited setting: outbreak
description and lessons learned from Abakaliki,

Nigeria (January-March 2012). Int J Infect Dis. 2013;
17:e1011-6.

Dahmane A, van Griensven J, Van Herp M, Van den Bergh R,
Nzomukunda Y, Prior J, et al. Constraints in the diagnosis
and treatment of Lassa fever and the effect on mortality in
hospitalized children and women with obstetric conditions
ina rural district hospital in Sierra Leone. Trans R Soc Trop
Med Hyg. 2014;108:126-32.

Emerging Infectious Diseases * www.cdc.gov/eid * Vol. 31, No. 2, February 2025 e15
— — PAGE 8 — —
ONLINE REPORT

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

Grace JA, Egoh JJ, Udensi N. Epidemiological trends of Lassa

fever in Nigeria from 2015-2021: a review. Ther Adv Infect
Dis. 2021;8:20499361211058252.

Olayinka AT, Bourner J, Akpede GO, Okoeguale J,
Abejegah C, Ajayi NA, et al. A standardised phase III clinical
trial framework to assess therapeutic interventions for Lassa
fever. PLoS Neg] Trop Dis. 2022;16:e0010089.

The International Severe Acute Respiratory and Emerging
Infection Consortium. West Africa Lassa Fever Consortium
(WALC) [cited 2024 Feb 20]. https://isaric.org/research/
lassa-fever-resources/walc

Bourner J, Salam AP, Jaspard M, Olayinka A, Fritzell C,
Goncalves B, et al. WALC Work Package 2 Working Group.
The West Africa Lassa Fever Consortium pre-positioned
protocol for a Phase II/III adaptive, randomised, controlled,
platform trial to evaluate multiple Lassa fever therapeutics.
Wellcome Open Res. 2023;8:122.

Riviello ED, Kiviri W, Twagirumugabe T, Mueller A,
Banner-Goodspeed VM, Officer L, et al. Hospital incidence
and outcomes of the acute respiratory distress syndrome
using the Kigali modification of the Berlin definition.

Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2025;193:52-9.

Singer M, Deutschman CS, Seymour CW, Shankar-Hari M,
Annane D, Bauer M, et al. The Third International
Consensus definitions for sepsis and septic shock (sepsis-3).
JAMA. 2016;315:801-10.

Okokhere P, Colubri A, Azubike C, Iruolagbe C, Osazuwa O,
Tabrizi S, et al. Clinical and laboratory predictors of Lassa
fever outcome in a dedicated treatment facility in Nigeria: a

24.

28.

29.

retrospective, observational cohort study. Lancet Infect Dis.
2018;18:684-95.

Pocock SJ, Ariti CA, Collier TJ, Wang D. The win ratio: a new
approach to the analysis of composite end points in clinical
trials based on clinical priorities. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:176-82.
Chuang-Stein C, Anderson K, Gallo P, Collins S. Sample size
reestimation: a review and recommendations. Drug Inf J.
2006;40:475-84.

Salam AP, Duvignaud A, Jaspard M, Malvy D,

Carroll M, Tarning J, et al. Ribavirin for treating Lassa fever:
a systematic review of pre-clinical studies and implications
for human dosing. PLoS Negl Trop Dis. 2022;16:e0010289.
Groger M, Akhideno P, Kleist CJ, Babatunde FO, Edeawe O,
Hinzmann J, et al. Pharmacokinetics of ribavirin in the
treatment of Lassa fever: an observational clinical study at
the Irrua Specialist Teaching Hospital, Edo State, Nigeria.
Clin Infect Dis. 2023;76:e841-8.

Chiosi JJ, Schieffelin JS, Shaffer JG, Grant DS. Evaluation

of three clinical prediction tools to predict mortality in
hospitalized patients with Lassa fever. Am J Trop Med Hyg.
2022;107:856-62.

Fisher-Hoch S, McCormick JB, Sasso D, Craven RB.
Hematologic dysfunction in Lassa fever. J Med Virol.
1988;26:127-35.

Address for correspondence: Josephine Bourner, Oxford

University, Pandemic Sciences Institute, New Richards Bldg,
Old Road Campus, Oxford OX3 7LG, UK; email:
josephine.bourner@ndm.ox.ac.uk

etymologia revisited

virus

Originally published
in June 2010

References:
1 Frame JD, Baldwin JM Jr, Gocke DJ, Troup JM. Lassa fever, a new

Lassa Virus
[lah sa] virus

his virus was named after the town of Lassa at the south-

ern end of Lake Chad in northeastern Nigeria, where the
first known patient, a nurse in a mission hospital, had lived
and worked when she contracted this infection in 1969. The
virus was discovered as part of a plan to identify unknown
viruses from Africa by collecting serum specimens from pa-
tients with fevers of unknown origin. Lassa virus, transmitted
by field rats, is endemic in West Africa, where it causes up to
300,000 infections and 5,000 deaths each year.

disease of man from West Africa. I. Clinical description and pathologi-
cal findings. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1970;19:670-6

2. Mahy BW. The dictionary of virology, 4th ed. Burlington (MA): Else-

vier; 2009.

e16

https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/eid/article/16/6/et-1606 article

Emerging Infectious Diseases » www.cdc.gov/eid * Vol. 31, No. 2, February 2025

