— — PAGE 1 — —
® Journal of

Cheok for Clinical
Epidemiology

updates

Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 164 (2023) 88 95

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Clinical trials of pneumonia management assess heterogeneous outcomes
and measurement instruments

Alexander G. Mathioudakis*”’*, Markus Fally®, Jan Hansel“, Rebecca C. Robey“,
Faiuna Haseeb*, Thomas Williams*, Ahmed Kouta’, Tobias Welte’, Dan G. Wootton®,
Mike Clarke", Grant Waterer', Paul Dark*, Paula R. Williamson’, J grgen Vestbo’”,
Timothy W. Felton*®°, Pneumonia Outcomes Group!

“Division of Immunology, Immunity to Infection and Respiratory Medicine, School of Biological Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
>North West Lung Centre, Wythenshawe Hospital, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre,
Manchester, UK
“Department of Respiratory Medicine and Infectious Diseases, Copenhagen University Hospital - Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg, Copenhagen, Denmark
‘North West School of Intensive Care Medicine, Health Education England North West, Manchester, UK
“Acute Intensive Care Unit, Wythenshawe Hospital, Manchester University NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre,
Manchester, UK
‘Department of Respiratory Medicine and German Centre of Lung Research (DZL), Hannover Medical School, Hanover, Germany
"Institute of Infection, Veterinary and Ecological Sciences, NIHR HPRU in Emerging and Zoonotic Infections, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK
"Centre of Public Health, School of Medicine, Dentistry and Biomedical Sciences, Queen s University Belfast, Belfast, UK
‘School of Medicine and Pharmacology, Royal Perth Hospital, University of Western Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia
jDepartment of Health Data Science, MRC/NIHR Trials Methodology Research Partnership, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK

Accepted 18 October 2023; Published online 26 October 2023

Abstract

Objectives: To inform clinical practice guidelines, randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of the management of pneumonia need to
address the outcomes that are most important to patients and health professionals using consistent instruments, to enable results to be
compared, contrasted, and combined as appropriate. This systematic review describes the outcomes reported in clinical trials of pneumonia
management and the instruments used to measure these outcomes.

Study Design and Setting: Based on a prospective protocol, we searched MEDLINE/PubMed, Cochrane CENTRAL and clinical trial
registries for ongoing or completed clinical trials evaluating pneumonia management in adults in any clinical setting. We grouped reported
outcomes thematically and classified them following the COMET Initiative’s taxonomy. We describe instruments used for assessing each
outcome.

Results: We found 280 eligible RCTs of which 115 (41.1 _) enrolled critically ill patients and 165 (58.9 _) predominantly noncritically
ill patients. We identified 43 distinct outcomes and 108 measurement instruments, excluding nonvalidated scores and questionnaires.
Almost all trials reported clinical/physiological outcomes (97.5 _). Safety (63.2), mortality (56.4), resource use (48.6 _) and life impact
(11.8 ) outcomes were less frequently addressed. The most frequently reported outcomes were treatment success (60.7 ), mortality
(56.4 ) and adverse events (41.1). There was significant variation in the selection of measurement instruments, with approximately
two-thirds used in less than 10 of the 280 RCTs. None of the patient-reported outcomes were used in 10 or more RCTs.

Conclusion: This review reveals significant variation in outcomes and measurement instruments reported in clinical trials of pneumonia
management. Outcomes that are important to patients and health professionals are often omitted. Our findings support the need for a

Jan Hansel, Faiuna Haseeb, Ahmed Kouta, Alexander G. Mathioudakis,
Eva Polverino, Claire Roger, Rebecca C Robey, Nikoletta Rovina, Daiana
Stolz, Jorgen Vestbo, Grant Waterer, Tobias Welte, Thomas Williams, Paula
R. Williamson, Dan G. Wootton, Geffen van Wouter.

* Corresponding author. Division of Immunology, Immunity to Infection
and Respiratory Medicine, NIHR Clinical Lecturer in Respiratory Medicine,
The University of Manchester, North-West Lung Centre, Manchester Uni-
versity NHS Foundation Trust, Manchester M23 9LT, UK. Tel.:  44-
0161-291-2500; fax: 44-0161-291-5730.

E-mail address: alexander.mathioudakis@manchester.ac.uk (A.G.
Mathioudakis).

Funding: AGM, JH, RCR, PD, JV, and TWF were supported by the
NIHR Manchester Biomedical Research Centre (NIHR203308). AGM was
supported by an NIHR Clinical Lectureship in Respiratory Medicine. JH
was supported by an NIHR Academic Clinical Fellowship in Intensive Care
Medicine. PD was supported by an NIHR Senior Investigator’s award
(NIHR203745). DGW is supported by an NIHR Advanced Fellowship
(NIHR300669). The views expressed are those of the author(s) and not
necessarily those of the NIHR or the Department of Health and Social Care.

' Pneumonia Outcomes Group: Stefano Aliberti, Aleksandra Barac,
Francesco Blasi, Jean Chastre, Mike Clarke, Catia Ciloniz, Paul Dark,
George Dimopoulos, Markus Fally, Timothy W Felton, Andrea Gramegna,

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2023.10.011
0895-4356/ 2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsevier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
— — PAGE 2 — —
A.G. Mathioudakis et al. / Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 164 (2023) 88 95 89

rigorous core outcome set, such as that being developed by the European Respiratory Society.

2023 The Author(s). Published by Elsev-

ier Inc. This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

Keywords: Pneumonia; Community-acquired pneumonia; Hospital-acquired pneumonia; Ventilator-associated pneumonia; Outcomes; End points; Core

outcome set; Clinical trials; Systematic reviews; Evidence-based medicine

1 Introduction

Pneumonia, an inflammatory condition of the lungs usu-
ally caused by bacteria, viruses or other microorganisms,
accounts for almost three million deaths annually world-
wide [1,2]. It is also associated with considerable
morbidity, health-care expenditure and resource use [3].
Depending on the timing and location of infection, pneu-
monia is usually classified as community-acquired pneu-
monia (CAP), hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP), or
ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) [4]. Some authors
also suggest a fourth category of pneumonia for patients
not hospitalized, but with a significant exposure to the
health-care system: healthcare-associated pneumonia [4],
which has been debated intensively throughout the last de-
cades [5].

Despite our expanding understanding of mechanisms
that underlie pneumonia, available treatments remain sub-
optimal and pneumonia still causes unacceptable morbidity
and mortality [3,6]. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
represent the optimal study design for assessing the safety
and clinical effectiveness of novel therapeutics, but the
design, conduct and reporting of clinical trials investigating
pneumonia management is complicated due to the acute na-
ture and heterogeneity of the condition [7]. Ad hoc recruit-
ment of patients upon presentation for an acute condition is
challenging. Furthermore, potential participants may not be
able or willing to give informed consent while they are
acutely ill and unwell [7]. This is further complicated by
multiple causative pathogens, a divergent host-response,
heterogeneity in study populations that may suffer from
various comorbidities and be using intercurrent medica-
tions, resulting in distinct clinical trajectories. In parallel,
the main characteristics of therapeutic trials reporting on
pneumonia management lack standardization, with signifi-
cant variation in the diagnostic criteria [8,9], outcomes
and outcome measurement instruments used [10,11].

To ensure that clinical trials inform clinical guidelines and
practice effectively [12], they must address outcomes that are
most relevant to both patients and health-care professionals
[7,12,13]. It is also crucial to consistently evaluate critically
important outcomes using the same, optimal measurement
instruments, allowing findings to be easily compared, con-
trasted, and combined in systematic reviews and clinical
practice guidelines. Use of a core outcome set (COS), an
agreed minimum set of critically important outcomes
required for decision-making that should be evaluated in
all future trials in a specific area of health care, can resolve
these problems [7,13]. Indeed, in other disease areas, COS

have improved the quality of subsequent RCTs, ensuring that
these have addressed the most pertinent outcomes, making
them more comparable, and thus more likely to inform pol-
icy and clinical practice [14 16].

To date, the European Respiratory Society (ERS) has
supported the development of two COSs, the ERS Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) Exacerbations
Core Outcome Set [17 19], and the Core Outcome Mea-
sures Sets for Pediatric and Adult Severe Asthma [7,20].
More recently, the ERS has formed a task force aiming to
develop COSs for CAP, HAP, and VAP.

The specific aim of this systematic review was to iden-
tify the outcomes evaluated in RCTs reporting on the man-
agement of pneumonia in adults, along with their
corresponding measurement instruments, which will inform
the development of the ERS Pneumonia COS.

2 Materials and methods

This methodological systematic review was based on a
prospectively registered protocol (PROSPERO, ID:
CRD42019147411). It was conducted in line with guidance
from Cochrane and the Core Outcome Measures in Effec-
tiveness Trials (COMET) Initiative [13,21] and reported
following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic re-
views and Meta-Analyses [22].

Eligible studies included ongoing or completed RCTs
evaluating any pharmacological or nonpharmacological
intervention, including precision medicine interventions,
for pneumonia management, either CAP, HAP, or VAP in
adults. We accepted any established definitions and diag-
nostic criteria for the various types of pneumonia, but
excluded studies assessing a combination of clinical pre-
sentations extending beyond pneumonia (e.g., lower respi-
ratory tract infections). We also excluded RCTs focusing
on Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19), as these were
not included in the review protocol and have been ad-
dressed in a separate review [23]. We only included trial
protocols and/or the main trial publications; we excluded
secondary publications or reports of post-hoc RCT ana-
lyses. We only included reports in English.

We identified potentially relevant RCTs using a structured
search strategy consisting of controlled vocabulary and free
search terms describing pneumonia, along with filters that
included the Cochrane sensitivity and precision maximising
filter for RCTs (available in the online appendix). We
searched MEDLINE/PubMed, the Cochrane Register of
Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), the U.S. National Library
— — PAGE 3 — —
90 A.G. Mathioudakis et al. / Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 164 (2023) 88 95

What is new?

Key Findings

e This systematic review assessed the outcomes and
measurement instruments tested in 280 ongoing or
completed RCTs of pneumonia management.

The most frequently reported outcomes were treat-
ment success (60.7 ), mortality (56.4 ) and
adverse events (41.1).

With the exception of treatment success and mor-
tality, all other outcomes were assessed in less than
half of the included studies, highlighting a signifi-
cant variation in the selection of outcomes.

What this adds to what was known?

e Clinical trials of pneumonia management assess
heterogeneous outcomes and measurement instru-
ments. Outcomes that are important to patients,
health professionals and other stakeholders are
often omitted. This limits the interpretability and
comparability of trial results.

What is the implication and what should change

now?

e These findings underscore the necessity of estab-
lishing a core outcome set for future pneumonia
management RCTs, to enhance their quality and
comparability. A core outcome set is a minimum
agreed set of outcomes that will be assessed in
all future RCTs of pneumonia management. The
European Respiratory Society has initiated a task
force to develop a core outcome set that will be
informed by this methodological systematic review
and international, multi-stakeholder consensus.

of Medicine Clinical Trials Register (clinicaltrials.gov) and
the World Health Organisation (WHO) International Clin-
ical Trials Registry Platform for articles published from
1st January 2010 to 13th December 2021.

Search results were screened for eligibility by two inves-
tigators independently (from among AGM, MF, JH, FH,
AK) at title and abstract level, followed by full-text assess-
ment of all potentially eligible studies. Disagreement in this
and following steps were resolved by discussion or adjudi-
cation by a third reviewer. A risk of bias assessment of the
included studies was beyond the scope of this review, given
the focus on assessing the outcomes evaluated in pneu-
monia trials rather than the results of those trials. Eligible
studies were grouped into those evaluating exclusively pa-
tients admitted to an intensive care unit (ICU, which we
defined as “‘critically ill patients”’) vs. studies looking pre-
dominantly at patients who were not in ICU (which we

defined as ‘‘predominantly noncritically ill patients’),
given our experience that outcomes relevant to these patient
groups will differ considerably. One reviewer extracted
relevant study characteristics of all eligible studies in a
standardised form and a second reviewer cross-checked
the extracted data for accuracy (from among AGM, MF,
JH, RCR, FH, TW, AK). More specifically, we captured in-
formation regarding the study population, participant age,
recruitment setting, blinding, interventions, sponsor, and
geographic distribution of participating sites. All outcomes
reported in each study alongside the outcome measurement
instruments used to evaluate them were recorded verbatim.

After assessing the outcomes in a random sample of 20
studies from the critically ill and from the predominantly
noncritically ill groups and drawing on our experience in pre-
vious systematic reviews evaluating the outcomes of other
acute respiratory conditions, namely COVID-19 and COPD
exacerbations [23,24], we developed an initial list of
outcome domains that were classified following the taxon-
omy proposed by the COMET Initiative [25]. Two reviewers
independently categorized each of the extracted verbatim
outcome descriptions into a single outcome domain (from
among AGM, ME, JH, RCR, FH, TW, AK). The list was
expanded as needed after discussion among the extractors
upon identification of additional outcome domains that were
not initially included. Our findings are described narratively
and in tabulated format. The unit of interest for this report is
the trial. We assessed each trial once and collated data from
multiple eligible reports of the same trial.

3 Results
3.1. Included studies

Following deduplication, our searches retrieved 4,492
records, of which 358, reporting on 280 RCTs, were
considered eligible. These included 181 (64.6 ) completed
RCTs with published results, and 99 (35.4 ) studies
without published results, the majority of which are still
ongoing. Characteristics of the included trials are described
in Supplementary Table 1.

3.2. Patient populations, disease groups and
interventions

There were 115 (41.1 ) RCTs that enrolled critically ill
patients, with a median study size of 82 participants (range:
4 1,200). Of these RCTs, 79 (68.7 ) included only pa-
tients with VAP, 14 (12.2 ) only patients with CAP, one
(0.9 ) only patients with HAP, while the remaining 21
(18.3 ) accepted a combination of CAP, VAP and/or
HAP. The most frequently assessed interventions in these
trials were antibiotics (n 72, 62.6); precision medicine
interventions (n 10, 8.7); and steroids, anti-
inflammatories or immunomodulating agents including bi-
ologics (n 8, 7.0).
— — PAGE 4 — —
A.G. Mathioudakis et al. / Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 164 (2023) 88 95

There were 165 (58.9 ) RCTs that recruited patients
who were predominantly noncritically ill, with a median
study size of 172 participants (range: 5 7,100). Solely pa-
tients with CAP were recruited in 124 (75.2 _) and only pa-
tients with HAP were recruited in four (2.4 __) trials, while
the rest accepted combinations of CAP, HAP, and/or VAP.
Antibiotics (1 77, 46.7.) were the most frequently as-

sessed intervention, followed by _ steroids, anti-
inflammatories or immunomodulating agents (n 19,
11.5) and traditional medicine interventions (n 12,

7.3 =)+.

3.3. Trial outcomes

Our review identified 43 outcome domains and 108 mea-
surement instruments, excluding nonvalidated scores and
questionnaires (Fig. 1). The definitions of the various out-

comes, the frequencies of their reporting, and the

noe
no Siyenuwuoosi

0} 2

i)
es

91

corresponding instruments used to measure them in the
included RCTs are presented in Supplementary Tables 2
and 3 A primary outcome was defined in 226 (80.7) of
the RCTs, with similar proportions for trials focusing on
critically ill (1 = 92, 80.0) and predominantly noncriti-
cally ill(m 134, 81.2. ) patients.

The included RCTs reported on a median of five outcome
domains [interquartile range: 3. 7], with up to 16 domains
assessed (Fig. 2). These figures did not differ between
studies assessing critically ill (5 [4 8]) or predominantly
noncritically ill (5 [3 7]) patients. There was no clear asso-
ciation between the number of participants and number of
outcome domains evaluated (Fig. 3). Although some trials
reported a larger number of outcomes, for the purpose of this
analysis, we reclassified based on our 43 identified domains.

Classification of outcomes into the COMET taxonomy
revealed that 97.5 _ of all trials assessed at least one clin-
ical/physiological outcome, while 65.0 defined a primary

Fig 1 Sunburnt plot summarising the frequency that outcomes are reported in pneumonia RCTs outcomes reported in <2 trials are not labeled in
this figure). For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)
— — PAGE 5 — —
92 A.G. Mathioudakis et al. / Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 164 (2023) 88 95

Number of outcome domains assessed per trial

16
15
14
243
@ 42

°
git

e€
=
oo

Number of outcom

= MO wf ODN OC

10 15 20

Patient Group

BB Critically ill
c Predominantly
non-critically ill

25 30 35

Number of studies

Fig 2 Number of outcome domains assessed per trial. For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to

the Web version of this article.)

outcome from this category. Safety outcomes were ad-
dressed in 63.2 of all trials, but were rarely selected as
primary outcomes (3.6). Mortality/survival, resource use
and life impact were assessed less frequently, in 56.4 ,
48.6 and 11.8 of all trials, respectively, and were infre-
quently selected as primary outcomes (13.6 ,6.1 , 1.4

respectively). Overall, the most frequently reported out-
comes were treatment success (60.7 _), followed by mortal-
ity (56.4 ) and adverse events (41.1). It is worth noting
that treatment success and mortality were the only out-
comes assessed in more than half of the included studies.
In trials evaluating critically ill patients, mortality was the
most frequently used outcome (62.6 ), followed by
adverse events (60.9 ) and treatment success (56.5 ).
Conversely, trials looking at noncritically ill patients re-
ported most frequently on treatment success (63.6), fol-
lowed by mortality (52.1) and adverse events (49.1).

3.4. Measurement instruments to assess outcomes

There was significant variation in the selection of instru-
ments used for assessing the various outcomes, with a total
of 108 different instruments used across all included trials
(Supplementary Table 2). Of note, 73 (67.6 ) of the
included instruments were used in 10 RCTs or less. Impor-
tantly, none of the patient-reported instruments were used
in 10 or more RCTs.

4 Discussion and conclusion

This systematic review describes the outcomes and
outcome measurement instruments tested in 280 ongoing

or completed RCTs evaluating interventions for pneumonia
management. There was significant variability in the re-
ported outcomes. Outcomes that are important to patients,
health professionals, and policy makers were often omitted.
One in three trials did not report on safety, while four in ten
did not assess mortality or the overall outcome of the infec-
tion (treatment success). With the exception of the afore-
mentioned three outcomes, all other identified outcomes
were assessed in less than half of the included studies.
We also detected wide variation in the instruments used
to assess outcomes such as treatment success, disease
severity, signs, symptoms, or health status. Although sub-
jective and patient reported outcomes are often reported,
less than half the included RCTs were double-blind, raising
concerns around potential risk of bias.

The included studies were grouped into those assessing
critically ill patients and those including predominantly
noncritically ill patients, as we expected that the outcomes
and measurement instruments might differ across these cat-
egories. The (ongoing) need for ICU admission or invasive
ventilation, duration of antibiotics, disease severity or tra-
jectory were more frequently assessed in studies focusing
on critically ill patients. In addition, the instruments used
to assess some of the outcomes varied across the two
groups of studies. For example, in critically ill patients,
safety was more often assessed by laboratory testing,
whereas studies of noncritically ill patients commonly
relied on clinical indices. Studies of critically ill patients as-
sessed the duration of ICU admission or mechanical venti-
lation, while those of noncritically ill patients used the
requirement for intensive care as an outcome. Interestingly,
studies evaluating critically ill patients with CAP selected
— — PAGE 6 — —
A.G. Mathioudakis et al. / Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 164 (2023) 88 95 93

apuutcome domains assessed according to sample size and sponsor

Sample size

4+ a at
a s
an BAe Mee ata a

i+

» +4e a **6
4 ¢ to 4

Patient Group

* Critically ill
Predominantly
non-critically ill

Sponsor

* Academic centre/Hospital
* Pharmaceutical industry
» Unclear

2 4 6 8 10

12 14 16

Number of outcome domains

Fig 3 Number of outcome domains assessed according to the study sample size. For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend,

the reader is referred to the Web version of this article.)

similar outcomes to studies looking at VAP, perhaps sug-
gesting the need for two COSs, focusing on the treatment
setting, rather than the classification of pneumonia.
Despite being the most frequently assessed outcome
across the included RCTs, there are no established and vali-
dated tools for assessing treatment success or failure in
pneumonia or other acute respiratory conditions [26]. This
outcome is defined as an overall assessment of whether
pneumonia was treated successfully or not. Broadly, there
are three different groups of instruments evaluating this
outcome, but they are defined differently across various
RCTs, leading to significant inconsistency and poor compa-
rability. Descriptive instruments define treatment success or
failure based on qualitative or semi-quantitative descrip-
tions of the patients’ clinical status with regards to the
pneumonia, as judged by the responsible health-care pro-
fessional. For example, in descriptive tools, cure is often
defined as a complete or nearly complete resolution of all
signs and symptoms of the pneumonia, with some trials
also requiring the normalisation of laboratory and radiolog-
ical findings. Treatment failure is defined as a lack of
improvement or deterioration of the clinical condition of
the patient, while intermediate status might be labeled as
“clinical improvement” or “marked clinical improve-
ment’. The second group of instruments usually defines
treatment success or failure as a composite outcome con-
sisting of several desirable or undesirable scenarios,
together defining an overall favourable or unfavourable
outcome. For example, treatment failure might be defined
as the need for supplemental oxygen, hospital admission,
extension of the consolidation on imaging, or death. The
third group of instruments focuses on the need for

additional unplanned treatments, and mainly the need for
additional antibiotics beyond the predefined course. In this
group, treatment success is typically defined as an
improved clinical condition of the patient who does not
require any further antibiotics. For the purposes of this
work, we presented these three broad instrument categories.
However, the inconsistent definition of treatment success
and the frequent inclusion of highly subjective measure-
ment tools is a key finding of this review and there is an ur-
gent need for a rigorously validated tool.

Microbiological cure or eradication has also been as-
sessed in 3/10 studies, with equal distribution between
those looking at critical or not necessarily critical out-
comes. This outcome did not fulfill our definition of treat-
ment success/failure, so it was reported separately.
Microbiological cure is a surrogate outcome predicting
the clinically important outcomes. It was only assessed in
31.1 of all trials, but that is probably because patients
were followed-up until clinical cure, that is more important
to patients and clinicians.

Patient-reported outcome measures (PROM) were evalu-
ated infrequently. More specifically, symptoms, quality of
life and health status were only considered in 14.6 ,
5.7. and 1.8 of the whole sample of RCTs, while the
respective proportions for studies assessing critically ill pa-
tients were even lower (7.0 , 6.1 and 0.0). This will
need to be addressed, especially given the long-term
sequelae that severe pneumonia has on the health and
well-being of patients. There are no PROMs validated in
HAP but two, well validated, CAP specific PROMs exist
[27,28]. However, most CAP trials used nonvalidated in-
struments. The creation, validation and consistent use of
— — PAGE 7 — —
94 A.G. Mathioudakis et al. / Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 164 (2023) 88 95

PROMs should be emphasized when agreeing a COS for
pneumonia trials.

Recent methodological reviews of the outcomes evalu-
ated in other acute respiratory presentations, namely acute
exacerbations of COPD and COVID-19 revealed similar
findings and limitations [23,24]. Both the outcomes and
measurement instruments that are used in all three disease
areas vary widely and are drawn from the same pool
described in this paper. There is little focus on the longitu-
dinal impact of acute events on the health and well-being of
patients and this may need to be revisited given that these
domains were prioritised in the COPD Exacerbations
COS, that was based on _ global, multi-stakeholder
consensus with strong patient involvement [19].

Our findings suggest that several RCTs on the manage-
ment of pneumonia cannot adequately inform clinical rec-
ommendations and practice because their results cannot be
properly compared, contrasted, and combined. These find-
ings confirm the need for COSs for trials on the management
of various types of pneumonia, to ensure that future trials
address the most critical outcomes in a standardized way,
thus improving their quality and comparability.

Two previous consensus documents have prioritized out-
comes for evaluation in clinical trials of CAP [11] and
HAP/VAP [10]. Both recommended the evaluation of
safety, mortality, and treatment success; which were most
frequently assessed outcomes in RCTs in this study. They
also encouraged the use of other outcomes that are less
frequently tested in clinical trials, such as quality of life,
severity scores, and, for studies assessing CAP, the need
for ICU admission. Although the CAP document was pub-
lished almost 20 years ago, trial adherence to the recom-
mended outcomes remains limited. The HAP/VAP
document is newer, and adherence cannot be appreciated
yet. Uptake of such documents is key to their success.
The planned ERS Pneumonia COSs are being developed
following rigorous methodology proposed by the COMET
initiative, which is based on thorough methodological sys-
tematic reviews (such as this one) and international, multi-
stakeholder involvement and consensus [29,30]. It is antic-
ipated that the core outcomes will be endorsed by the ERS.
We hope that these strengths, along with a rigorous dissem-
ination strategy will maximise the likelihood of success.

The main limitation of this review is that we were not
able to classify trials according to their trial phase. It is
generally acceptable for phase 2 trials to have more explor-
atory or preliminary outcomes [31]. However, a significant
proportion of the included trials did not report on their
phase and classification was not possible. Moreover, we
did not address the timepoints at which various outcomes
were measured, or the exact methods for analysing various
outcomes and instruments, as these were beyond the scope
of our work. These important parameters will need to be
addressed in future work. Indeed, assessing mortality only
during ICU stay or hospital admission can be misleading,
as it overlooks the substantial mortality occurring within

6 12 months post the acute event. Furthermore, this
approach may introduce bias due to variations in the length
of ICU/hospital stays mong different treatment groups or
participants. Likewise, the analysis of treatment success
can be conducted either at as specific timepoint or based
on time-to-treatment success. The latter strategy generally
provides a more robust analysis with greater power to iden-
tify differences. Another potential limitation of this work is
that we only included studies reported in the English lan-
guage. However, the number and broad geographic distri-
bution of the included studies reassures that we have not
missed outcomes.

The main strengths of this systematic review are the
rigorous literature review that revealed 280 eligible studies,
including ongoing and completed RCTs, allowing us to
capture the frequency at which relevant outcomes and mea-
surement instruments are assessed in RCTs of pneumonia
management. Characteristically, after extracting data from
approximately 15 and 60 _ of the included studies, we
reached saturation of outcomes and measurement instru-
ments, respectively.

It should be noted that for completeness we have
included all outcomes evaluated in the included studies.
Some of these outcomes, such as guidelines adherence or
satisfaction of health professionals are not patient health
outcomes, and will therefore be excluded from the COS
development. Moreover, the ERS COS will focus on late
phase efficacy and effectiveness trials and will not consider
pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics, that are more
relevant to early phase trials, while cost-effectiveness ana-
lyses will not be considered either. Although biomarkers
are often assessed as surrogates to patient important out-
comes, it is still debated whether they should be considered
as outcomes, especially in effectiveness trials.

In summary, this methodological review identifies the
outcomes and outcome measurement instruments reported
in trials on the management of pneumonia, quantifying
how frequently they are used. These findings will inform
the development of the ERS Pneumonia COSs.

CRediT authorship contribution statement

Study conception: AGM, MF, JV, TF. Study design:
AGM, MF, PD, PRW, JV, TF. Methodological expertise:
AGM, PRW. Screening, study selection, data extraction:
AGM, MF, JH, RCR, FH, TW, AK. Analysis: AGM, TF.
Manuscript drafting: AGM, MF, TF. Interpretation of find-
ings: All authors. Critical revision of the manuscript: All
authors.

Data availability

This is a systematic review. Data are available from the
original publications that have been included and cited.
— — PAGE 8 — —
A.G. Mathioudakis et al. / Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 164 (2023) 88 95 95

Declaration of competing interest

The authors declare no conflict of interest related to this
work.

Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2023.10.011.

References

[1]

[2]

[3]

\4

e

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9

=

[10]

(11]

[12]
13)

[14]

Mortality GBD. Causes of death C: global, regional, and national life
expectancy, all-cause mortality, and cause-specific mortality for 249
causes of death, 1980-2015: a systematic analysis for the Global
Burden of Disease Study 2015. Lancet 2016;388:1459 544.
Collaborators GL. Age-sex differences in the global burden of lower
respiratory infections and risk factors, 1990-2019: results from the
Global Burden of Disease Study 2019. Lancet Infect Dis 2022;22:
1626 47.

Welte T, Torres A, Nathwani D. Clinical and economic burden of
community-acquired pneumonia among adults in Europe. Thorax
2012;67:71 9.

Venditti M, Falcone M, Corrao S, Licata G, Serra P. Study Group of
the Italian Society of Internal M: outcomes of patients hospitalized
with community-acquired, health care-associated, and hospital-
acquired pneumonia. Ann Intern Med 2009;150:19 26.

Ewig S, Kolditz M, Pletz MW, Chalmers J. Healthcare-associated
pneumonia: is there any reason to continue to utilize this label in
2019? Clin Microbiol Infect 2019;25:1173 9.

Musher DM, Thorner AR. Community-acquired pneumonia. N Engl
J Med 2015;372:294.

Mathioudakis AG, Khaleva E, Fally M, Williamson PR, Jensen JU,
Felton TW, et al. Core outcome sets, developed collaboratively with
patients, can improve the relevance and comparability of clinical tri-
als. Eur Respir J 2023;61:2202107.

Weiss E, Essaied W, Adrie C, Zahar JR, Timsit JF. Treatment of se-
vere hospital-acquired and ventilator-associated pneumonia: a sys-
tematic review of inclusion and judgment criteria used in
randomized controlled trials. Crit Care 2017;21:162.

Flateau C, Le Bel J, Tubiana S, Blanc FX, Choquet C, Rammaert B,
et al. High heterogeneity in community-acquired pneumonia inclu-
sion criteria: does this impact on the validity of the results of random-
ized controlled trials? BMC Infect Dis 2018;18:607.

Weiss E, Zahar JR, Alder J, Asehnoune K, Bassetti M, Bonten MJM,
et al. Elaboration of consensus clinical endpoints to evaluate antimi-
crobial treatment efficacy in future hospital-acquired/ventilator-
associated bacterial pneumonia clinical trials. Clin Infect Dis 2019;
69:1912 8.

Barlow GD, Lamping DL, Davey PG, Nathwani D. Evaluation
of outcomes in community-acquired pneumonia: a guide for pa-
tients, physicians, and policy-makers. Lancet Infect Dis 2003;3:
476 88.

Ioannidis JP. Clinical trials: what a waste. BMJ 2014;349:¢7089.
Williamson PR, Altman DG, Bagley H, Barnes KL, Blazeby JM,
Brookes ST, et al. The COMET Handbook: version 1.0. Trials
2017;18:280.

Williamson PR, de Avila Oliveira R, Clarke M, Gorst SL, Hughes K,
Kirkham JJ, et al. Assessing the relevance and uptake of core
outcome sets (an agreed minimum collection of outcomes to measure
in research studies) in Cochrane systematic reviews: a review. BMJ
Open 2020;10:e036562.

[15]

[16]

[17]

[18]

[19]

[20]

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

[30]

[31]

Kirkham JJ, Boers M, Tugwell P, Clarke M, Williamson PR.
Outcome measures in rheumatoid arthritis randomised trials over
the last 50 years. Trials 2013;14:324.

Fally M, Mathioudakis AG, Wingfield Digby J, Williamson PR. Out-
comes assessed in therapeutic randomized controlled trials in hospi-
talized patients with COVID-19: is the meta Core Outcome Set
(meta-COS) adopted? Clin Microbiol Infect 2022;28:456 7.
Mathioudakis AG, Janner J, Moberg M, Alonso-Coello P, Vestbo J. A
systematic evaluation of the diagnostic criteria for COPD and exac-
erbations used in randomised controlled trials on the management
of COPD exacerbations. ERJ Open Res 2019;5:00136 2019.
Mathioudakis AG, Abroug F, Agusti A, Bakke P, Bartziokas K,
Beghe B, et al. Core outcome set for the management of acute exac-
erbations of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: the COS-
AECOPD ERS Task Force study protocol. ERJ Open Res 2020;6:
00193 2020.

Mathioudakis AG, Abroug F, Agusti A, Ananth S, Bakke P,
Bartziokas K, et al. ERS Statement: a core outcome set for clinical
trials evaluating the management of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) exacerbations. Eur Respir J 2022;59:2102006.
Khaleva E, Rattu A, Brightling C, Bush A, Bossios A, Bourdin A,
et al. Development of core outcome measures sets for paediatric
and adult severe Asthma (COMSA). Eur Respir J 2022;61:2200606.
Higgins JPT, Thomas J, Chandler J, Cumpston M, Li T, Page MJ,
et al. Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of interventions.
The Cochrane Collaboration; 2022: version 6.3. Available at
training.cochrane.org/handbook/current. Accessed November 9,
2023.

Page MJ, McKenzie JE, Bossuyt PM, Boutron I, Hoffmann TC,
Mulrow CD, et al. The PRISMA 2020 statement: an updated guide-
line for reporting systematic reviews. J Clin Epidemiol 2021;134:
178 89.

Mathioudakis AG, Fally M, Hashad R, Kouta A, Hadi AS,
Knight SB, et al. Outcomes evaluated in controlled clinical trials
on the management of COVID-19: a methodological systematic re-
view. Life 2020;10:350.

Mathioudakis AG, Moberg M, Janner J, Alonso-Coello P, Vestbo J.
Outcomes reported on the management of COPD exacerbations: a
systematic survey of randomised controlled trials. ERJ Open Res
2019;5:00072 2019.

Dodd S, Clarke M, Becker L, Mavergames C, Fish R,
Williamson PR. A taxonomy has been developed for outcomes in
medical research to help improve knowledge discovery. J Clin Epide-
miol 2018;96:84 92.

Mathioudakis AG, Ananth S, Bradbury T, Csoma B, Sivapalan P,
Stovold E, et al. Assessing treatment success or failure as an outcome
in randomised clinical trials of COPD exacerbations. A meta-
epidemiological study. Biomedicines 2021;9:1837.

Wootton DG, Dickinson L, Pertinez H, Court J, Eneje O, Keogan L,
et al. A longitudinal modelling study estimates acute symptoms of
community acquired pneumonia recover to baseline by 10 days.
Eur Respir J 2017;49:1602170.

El Moussaoui R, Opmeer BC, Bossuyt PM, Speelman P, de
Borgie CA, Prins JM. Development and validation of a short ques-
tionnaire in community acquired pneumonia. Thorax 2004;59:
591 5.

Kirkham JJ, Gorst S, Altman DG, Blazeby JM, Clarke M, Devane D,
et al. Core outcome set-STAndards for reporting: the COS-STAR
statement. PLoS Med 2016;13:e1002148.

Kirkham JJ, Davis K, Altman DG, Blazeby JM, Clarke M, Tunis S,
et al. Core outcome set-STAndards for development: the COS-
STAD recommendations. PLoS Med 2017;14:e1002447.

Van Norman GA. Phase II trials in drug development and adaptive
trial design. JACC Basic Transl Sci 2019;4:428 37.
